---
title: "Deep Mapper Graph and its Application to Visualize Plausible Pathways on High-Dimensional Distribution with Small Time-Complexity"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-05-09-deep-mapper
message: 'Joint work with Fujitsu Ltd. - Now accepted at ECAI 2024!'
excerpt: 'We introduce a novel variant of the Mapper algorithm in order to find plausible protein conformational pathways. When applied to a 50S-ribosomal dataset, this proves to be more efficient than existing methods, while successfully recovering well-recognized pathways.'
date: 2024-02-29
venue: '27th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.19177'
citation: #'Your Name, You. (2015). &quot;Paper Title Number 3.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(3).'
---

Acquiring plausible pathways on high-dimensional structural distributions is beneficial in several domains. For example, in the drug discovery field, a protein conformational pathway, i.e. a highly probable sequence of protein structural changes, is useful to analyze interactions between the protein and the ligands, helping to create a new drug. Recently, a state-of-the-art method in drug discovery efficiently computed pathways of a protein, represented by 3D density maps, using latent variables obtained from an isometric auto-encoding of the space of 3D density maps. However, our preliminary experiments show that there is room to significantly reduce the computing time. In this study, we use the Mapper algorithm, which is a Topological Data Analysis method, and present a novel Mapper algorithm to extract plausible conformational pathways from the isometric latent space with comparatively short running time. The extracted pathways are visualized as paths on the resulting Mapper graph. The methodological novelties are described as follows: firstly, the filter function, which is associated to the Mapper algorithm, of our algorithm is optimized so as to extract the pathways via minimization of an energy loss defined on the Mapper graph, while filter functions taken in the classical Mapper algorithm are fixed beforehand. The optimization is with respect to parameters of a deep neural network in the filter. Secondly, the clustering technique, which defines the vertexes and edges of the Mapper graph, of our algorithm is designed by incorporating domain prior knowledge to assist the extraction. In our numerical experiments, based on an isometric latent space built by the common 50S-ribosomal dataset, the resulting Mapper graph successfully includes all the well-recognized plausible pathways. Moreover, our running time is much shorter than the above state-of-the-art counterpart.
